hi you've clicked on to today's tropical
did before Tuesday July 29th the
thoughts expressed in this video are
mine alone and in making decisions
please always consult the National
Hurricane Center and National Weather
Service not me well here's invest 93 L
out in the central Atlantic now we
talked about it yesterday getting much
better organized over time a convection
with it is a lot we good today these
thunderstorms are not as high up in the
atmosphere as they were but there are
still some and there's a pretty
well-defined center of circulation
evident on visible satellite imagery
here you can see it's spinning and this
is this is a tropical depression the
National Hurricane Center just has not
decided to call it one yet but that will
happen pretty soon I imagine probably
later today but this is struggling
already I said yesterday that I think it
will organize pretty nicely over the
next couple of days and then when it
gets in here will struggle the struggle
seem to be already beginning a little
bit you notice that as I said the
convection is weaker and do we have this
burst of dry tradewinds a burst of
african air coming out over the eastern
atlantic already seems to be messing
with these thunderstorms and preventing
them from going up as strongly now one
interesting feature that we can see on
satellite analysis today is that you see
this big arcing band of cloud here and
this tells us a lot about what the pros
and cons are for the environment of the
system right now and this art cloud is
the classic signature of a trade wind
bursts and that means that the winds
coming in on the eastern side of this
arc are moving faster than the winds on
the other side of it so you have this
burst of wind that is piling up and
causing this arcing cloud now this tells
us many things since it arcs out ahead
of 93 else center here we know that the
winds to the north of 93 el are moving
faster than they are down near the storm
itself and this means that if the winds
are stronger here and weaker here there
is natural shear vorticity or spin that
likes to form in this area and that's
really helping 93 el get organized and
spin up here at this low latitude now
that's the pro side the con side is that
this trade wind bursts in this part of
the world is almost always associated
with very dry air which you can see with
these scattered patchy light clouds
these are stratocumulus indicating a
very stable air layer and a ver
dry one as well and that's pushing this
art cloud towards the west to the north
of the storm and that means that the
stri air is now going to be attacking 93
el from the northeast and eventually
wrapping around from the northwest as
well over the coming days and the
destroyer may already be affecting part
of the circulation even today and the
problem with weighing pros and cons here
493 el is that if it's a contest between
spin and dry air in a heavyweight
matchup the dry air usually wins in fact
the dry air is usually it usually trumps
any other favorable factor that you
might have if dryer is in the mix it's
going to cause you problems no matter
how favorable the other parameters are
that's usually how it works but this is
the European model out two day for you
can see in the northern Lesser Antilles
here eventually passes just north of
Puerto Rico but it's really you don't
see much here it's not even a closed low
on the model thousand fifteen millibars
here vorticity maximum really weak and
then it just continues on here and
dissipates in this area east of florida
eventually on the model now here's the
GFS showing a moderate tropical storm
approaching the Lesser Antilles and then
by day six here it just dies north of
the Caribbean as it makes it into this
area here so it's much more like the
European now remember yesterday the GFS
was much more aggressive and made this a
hurricane as it came in here and to
continued to strengthen a little bit or
at least maintain itself in this area
southwest of bermuda that is no longer
the case as of the latest run we will
see if that's a trend now here's the
upper level of air flow as a day five on
the GFS and you can see where 93 L would
be north of Puerto Rico and again we
have this upper-level low to the west of
it and an upper level low to the
northeast and they are both moving in
opposite directions away from each other
this one out to the northeast this one
towards the southwest and this generally
allows nice anticyclonic clockwise flow
aloft to form and above a developing
system that is favorable because it's a
divergent pattern and it allows that
high to develop a loft which is what you
want over a system and we have this
trough over the eastern United States
which would likely caused this to
recurve but it's also a favorable
pattern for intensification because you
can really get that upper-level outflow
to expand
away from the system and let the air
pressure lower at the surface and
normally this would be a favorable
pattern you can see it's a little bit
there's a little bit of wind shear here
initially for the storm but if this was
a truly healthy tropical storm coming
north of Puerto Rico it would usually be
able to take advantage of this kind of
pattern in here but you know sometimes
the pattern can just be a little bit too
stable this air mass even north of the
Caribbean where the waters are warm we
know it's stable here because the water
is cooler than normal and we have this
dry trade wind bursts coming across
north of the system so I expect it to
struggle in here but even north of the
Caribbean perhaps the atmosphere will
just be a too stable if we look at the
Canadian ensemble by day six we see all
these orange colors now remember we saw
some green where 93 L is forming
yesterday associated with the Kelvin
wave that allowed air to spread out
aloft and cause air to rise orange
colors here indicate air converging
aloft which causes air to sink and that
destroys thunderstorms or prevents them
from forming at all and by day 6 we see
that covering most of the Atlantic here
and it may be that this pattern as this
year in general this is the kind of
pattern we've been having most of the
season so far may just be too much and
may overwhelm this system despite the
otherwise favorable pattern around it in
terms of wind flow and again the dry air
and sinking stable air will trump almost
any other favorable factor if you have
stable error in your ingredient list for
the storm it's likely to make the storm
struggle so bottom line right now this
storm is organizing will likely become
tropical storm Bertha sometime during
the next couple of days east of the
Lesser Antilles maybe of tropical
depression later today and then I expect
it will struggle to intensify as it
nears the Lesser Antilles probably won't
strengthen too much maybe a moderate
tropical storm as we talked about
yesterday near the Lesser Antilles you
can clearly see the airflow around the
subtropical high here will will direct
it west-northwest probably just scraping
the northern islands or maybe just north
of them which means they may get the
drier side of the storm by the time it
gets over here but there will be heavy
rain squalls and perhaps tropical storm
force winds for these folks in this area
but there are a few days to iron out the
details of the track and whether
tropical storm warnings will be
needed for those folks in there and then
by the time it gets past the islands and
southwest of bermuda northeast of the
bahamas in here i think it still may
have a chance to strengthen further but
there are some reasons to doubt it the
models are less aggressive today so we
will see the Atlantic is not very
favorable this year in general and this
storm may struggle like many others but
we shall see all right that's it for
today thanks for watching